[docs] How to run tests on iOS and Android (#36297)
dotnet/runtime: docs/workflow/testing/libraries/testing-apple.md

# Testing Libraries on iOS and tvOS

> In order to build librarires and tests for iOS or tvOS you only need some fresh version of XCode installed (e.g. 11.3 or higher).

Reviewer: librarires -> libraries

> Build Librarires for iOS:

Reviewer: same here

```

> ./build.sh -os iOS -arch x64 -subset Mono+Libs

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
./build.sh mono+libs -os iOS -arch x64
```

```
Run tests one by one for each test suite on a simulator:
```

> ./build.sh -os iOS -arch x64 -subset Libs.Tests -test

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
./build.sh libs.tests -os iOS -arch x64 -test
```

Author: TIL: subset can be omitted?

Reviewer 2: If it's the first argument then yes

```
Unlike XHarness-Android, XHarness for iOS is able to boot simulators by its own.

### Running individual test suites
- The following shows how to run tests for a specific library on a simulator
```
cd src/libraries/System.Numerics.Vectors/tests

> ../../../.././dotnet.sh build /t:Test /p:TargetOS=iOS /p:TargetArchitecture=x64

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
~runtime/dotnet.sh build /t:Test /p:TargetOS=iOS /p:TargetArchitecture=x64
```

```

> for devices you need to specify `DevTeamProvisioning`:

Reviewer: add a quick sentence about what DevTeamProvisioning is (ID of the team etc.)

```
cd src/libraries/System.Numerics.Vectors/tests

> ../../../.././dotnet.sh build /t:Test /p:TargetOS=iOS /p:TargetArchitecture=arm64 /p:DevTeamProvisioning=...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
~runtime/dotnet.sh build /t:Test /p:TargetOS=iOS /p:TargetArchitecture=arm64 /p:DevTeamProvisioning=...
```

# Testing Libraries on iOS and tvOS

> In order to build libraries and tests for iOS or tvOS you only need some fresh version of XCode installed (e.g. 11.3 or higher).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In order to build libraries and tests for iOS or tvOS you need recent version of XCode installed (e.g. 11.3 or higher).
```

Build Libraries for iOS:
```
./build.sh mono+libs -os iOS -arch x64
```
Run tests one by one for each test suite on a simulator:
```
./build.sh libs.tests -os iOS -arch x64 -test
```

> Unlike XHarness-Android, XHarness for iOS is able to boot simulators by its own.

Reviewer 3: Not sure this is necessary and it might cause confusion about the difference

```
./build.sh libs.tests -os iOS -arch x64 -test /p:DevTeamProvisioning=H1A2B3C4D5
```

> AppleAppBuilder generates temp Xcode projects you can manually open and resolve provisioning issues there using native UI and deploy to your devices.

Reviewer 3: Add link to AppleAppBuilder

cd src/libraries/System.Numerics.Vectors/tests
./dotnet.sh build /t:Test /p:TargetOS=iOS /p:TargetArchitecture=x64
```
for devices you need to specify `DevTeamProvisioning`:
```
./dotnet.sh build /t:Test /p:TargetOS=iOS /p:TargetArchitecture=arm64 /p:DevTeamProvisioning=...
```
AppleAppBuilder generates temp Xcode projects you can manually open and resolve provisioning there using native UI and deploy to your devices and start debugging.

> ### How the tests work

Reviewer 3: ### Test App Design

iOS/tvOS *.app (or *.ipa) is basically a simple [ObjC app](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/master/src/mono/msbuild/AppleAppBuilder/Templates/main-console.m) that inits the Mono Runtime. This Mono Runtime starts a simple xunit test
runner called XHarness TestRunner which runs tests for all *.Tests.dll libs in the bundle. There is also XHarness.CLI tool with `mlaunch` inside to deploy `*.app` and `*.ipa` to a target (device or simulator) and listens for logs via sockets.

### Known Issues

> - Most of the test suites crash on devices due to [#35674)(https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/35674)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Most of the test suites crash on devices due to #35674
```

- The following shows how to run tests for a specific library on a simulator
```
cd src/libraries/System.Numerics.Vectors/tests

> ./dotnet.sh build /t:Test /p:TargetOS=iOS /p:TargetArchitecture=x64

Reviewer: this needs to be reworked to be like below where you don't `cd` into the dir first

```
for devices you need to specify `DevTeamProvisioning`:
```
./dotnet.sh build /t:Test /p:TargetOS=iOS /p:TargetArchitecture=arm64 /p:DevTeamProvisioning=...
```
AppleAppBuilder generates temp Xcode projects you can manually open and resolve provisioning there using native UI and deploy to your devices and start debugging.

### How the tests work

> iOS/tvOS *.app (or *.ipa) is basically a simple [ObjC app](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/master/src/mono/msbuild/AppleAppBuilder/Templates/main-console.m) that inits the Mono Runtime. This Mono Runtime starts a simple xunit test

Reviewer: To make sure GitHub doesn't render it as italics:

```suggestion
iOS/tvOS `*.app` (or `*.ipa`) is basically a simple [ObjC app](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/master/src/mono/msbuild/AppleAppBuilder/Templates/main-console.m) that inits the Mono Runtime. This Mono Runtime starts a simple xunit test
```

> runner called XHarness TestRunner which runs tests for all *.Tests.dll libs in the bundle. There is also XHarness.CLI tool with `mlaunch` inside to deploy `*.app` and `*.ipa` to a target (device or simulator) and listens for logs via sockets.

Reviewer: To make sure GitHub doesn't render it as italics:
```suggestion
runner called XHarness TestRunner which runs tests for all `*.Tests.dll` libs in the bundle. There is also XHarness.CLI tool with `mlaunch` inside to deploy `*.app` and `*.ipa` to a target (device or simulator) and listens for logs via sockets.
```

Reviewer: btw. I don't think it makes sense to mention `mlaunch` here if we don't explain what it is, just creates confusion.
